Dengue, also known as dengue fever, is an infection spread by mosquitoes. It's not usually serious and often gets better on its own. Some people get a more severe type of dengue, but this is rare.

Check if you're at risk of dengue

You can get dengue if you're bitten by an infected mosquito. The mosquitoes that carry the dengue virus bite during the day.

Dengue is very common in certain parts of the world.

It's often found in tropical areas including:

some southern areas of North America

There's also a risk of getting dengue at certain times of the year (spring to November) in parts of southern Europe.

European countries where dengue has been found include:

Dengue is not found in the UK and you cannot catch it from another person.

You can check the risks for a country you're travelling to on the TravelHealthPro website

Dengue does not always cause symptoms.

If you do have symptoms, they usually start 4 to 10 days after being bitten by an infected mosquito.

Some dengue symptoms are similar to flu .

a blotchy rash made up of flat or slightly raised spots – this can affect large areas of your body

Urgent advice: Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:

you feel unwell after travelling to a country where dengue is found

Check your symptoms on 111 online or call 111. Tell anyone you speak to about your recent travel.

Get medical advice quickly if you have dengue symptoms while you're travelling.

Some people get a more severe type of dengue a few days after they first started feeling ill, but this is rare.

You may start to feel better with your temperature returning to normal, but about 24 to 48 hours later you may get more serious symptoms.

Symptoms of severe dengue include:

being unable to relax (restlessness)

Immediate action required: Call 999 or go to A&E if:

you have travelled to a country where dengue is found and you have symptoms of severe dengue

Severe dengue can be very serious if it's not treated quickly in hospital.

Go to a hospital as soon as possible if you get severe dengue symptoms while you're travelling.

Do not drive to A&E. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.

Bring any medicines you take with you.

Most people with dengue feel better in a few days.

There is no treatment for dengue, but you can help ease your symptoms by:

taking paracetamol to help bring down your temperature and ease any pain

Do not take anti-inflammatory painkillers like ibuprofen or aspirin. These can cause bleeding problems if you have dengue.

If you have severe dengue, you'll need to stay in hospital until you recover.

If you're at increased risk of getting seriously ill from dengue, you should consider not travelling to countries where the infection is found.

At-risk groups include those who:

have certain health conditions, including asthma, diabetes, high blood pressure or a condition that makes you bleed more easily

If you're in a country where dengue is found, the best way to prevent infection is to avoid being bitten by mosquitoes.

wear long-sleeved clothing and trousers to cover your arms and legs, particularly during early morning and early evening

wear long-sleeved clothing and trousers to cover your arms and legs, particularly during early morning and early evening

use insect repellent on your skin (ideally one that contains the ingredient DEET)

use insect repellent on your skin (ideally one that contains the ingredient DEET)

close windows and doors whenever possible, or use blinds or screens

close windows and doors whenever possible, or use blinds or screens

sleep under a mosquito net treated with insecticide, including during the day

sleep under a mosquito net treated with insecticide, including during the day

There is a vaccine that helps protect against dengue. It's recommended for people who have had, or might have had, dengue in the past and are travelling to a part of the world where dengue is common.

Get advice from a travel clinic if you're travelling to a part of the world where dengue is common.

If you need the vaccine, you'll have to pay for it privately.

Page last reviewed: 11 January 2023 Next review due: 11 January 2026