Malaria is a serious disease caused by a parasite. You get it when an infected mosquito bites you. Malaria is a major cause of death worldwide, but it is almost wiped out in the United States. The disease is mostly a problem in developing countries with warm climates. If you travel to these countries, you are at risk. There are four different types of malaria caused by four related parasites. The most deadly type occurs in Africa south of the Sahara Desert.

Malaria symptoms include chills, flu-like symptoms, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and jaundice. A blood test can diagnose it. It can be life-threatening. However, you can treat malaria with drugs. The type of drug depends on which kind of malaria you have and where you were infected.

Malaria can be prevented. When traveling to areas where malaria is found:

See your doctor for medicines that protect you

Wear insect repellent with DEET

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

About Malaria (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

How Malaria Spreads (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Malaria Tests (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Choosing a Drug to Prevent Malaria (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Malaria Risk Assessment for Travelers (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Mefloquine (Lariam) (Department of Veterans Affairs)

Treatment of Malaria (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

What to Know about Malaria in the U.S. (Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health)

Malaria (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases)

Malaria Surveillance, United States, 2022 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

New Monoclonal Antibody Shows Promise for Preventing Malaria Infections (University of Maryland, School of Medicine)

Slowing Malaria by Treating Mosquitoes (National Institutes of Health)

ClinicalTrials.gov: Malaria (National Institutes of Health)

Journal Articles References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine)

Article: Cost and cost-effectiveness of ivermectin mass drug administration for malaria control...

Article: A phase I/II randomized controlled clinical trial to assess the feasibility,...

Article: Housing modification to prevent malaria in Uganda: an analysis of costs,...

National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

Malaria (For Parents) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish

Alternatives for Pregnant Women (Malaria) (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Malaria (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish