Cancer is not just one disease but many diseases. Cancer begins in your cells, which are the building blocks of your body. Usually, your body forms new cells as needed, replacing old cells that die. Sometimes this process goes wrong. New cells grow even when you don't need them, and old cells don't die when they should. These extra cells can form a mass called a tumor.

Tumors can be benign or malignant. Benign tumors aren't cancer, while malignant ones are. Cells from malignant tumors can invade nearby tissues. They can also break away and spread to other parts of your body. The spread of cancer from one part of the body to another is called metastasis. Symptoms and treatment depend on the type of cancer and how advanced it is.

There are more than 100 different types of cancer. Cancer can start almost anywhere in your body. Most cancers are named for where they start. For example, lung cancer starts in the lung, and breast cancer starts in the breast.

Cancer may also be described by the type of cell that formed it, such as sarcoma if cancer begins in your bone and soft tissue. Carcinoma is the most common type of cancer. It is formed by epithelial cells, the cells that cover the inside and outside surfaces of your body.

Cancer is a genetic disease. That means changes in your genes cause it. Changes in your genes are also called gene variants or mutations. Genes are parts of DNA in your cells that you inherit from your parents. However, only some cancers are caused by genes passed down from your parents.

Genetic changes can occur to your genes over your lifetime that affect how your cells function. Usually, your body gets rid of damaged cells before they turn cancerous, but this ability goes down as you age. Other factors that may affect your risk of developing cancer can include:

Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) rays from the sun

What are the symptoms of cancer?

Cancer symptoms depend on the type of cancer. For example, some of the symptoms that cancer may cause can include:

Blood in your urine (pee) or stool (poop)

Bleeding or bruising for no known reason

A new mole or a change to a mole you already have

Cancer may cause various symptoms but often doesn't cause pain. Don't wait until you're having pain before seeing your health care provider. See your provider if you have symptoms that don't get better in a few weeks.

There is no single test that can diagnose cancer. The tests ordered are usually based on your symptoms. Your provider may:

Ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had cancer

Do a screening test such as a mammogram , colonoscopy , or a Pap test

Order blood tests or imaging tests

To find out if you have cancer, your provider may order a biopsy . A biopsy is the procedure of removing and examining tissue, cells, or fluids from your body.

What are the treatments for cancer?

Treatment depends on the type of cancer and how advanced it is. Most treatment plans may include surgery, radiation , and/or chemotherapy . Some may involve hormone therapy, immunotherapy or other types of biological therapy, or stem cell transplantation .

It's usually not possible to know exactly why cancer develops in some people but not others. There are some things that you can't control which may increase or decrease your risk of getting cancer, such as inheriting certain genes or your age. But some lifestyle habits may increase your risk of certain types of cancer. Avoid or reduce lifestyle habits such as:

Not getting enough physical activity

Cancer (American Academy of Family Physicians)

What Is Cancer? (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Biopsy: Types of Biopsy Procedures Used to Diagnose Cancer (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish

Cancer Screening Overview (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Cancer Staging (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Exams and Tests for Cancer (American Cancer Society) Also in Spanish

Fine Needle Aspiration (American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery)

How Cancer Is Diagnosed (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Karyotype Genetic Test (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) Test (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Nuclear Medicine Scans for Cancer (American Cancer Society)

Pathology Reports (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Tumor Grade (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Tumor Marker Tests (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Tumor Markers (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Antioxidants and Cancer Prevention (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Cancer Prevention Overview (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Lowering Your Cancer Risk: Healthy Living for Cancer Prevention (National Institutes of Health) Also in Spanish

Tobacco (American Cancer Society)

A to Z List of Cancer Drugs (National Cancer Institute)

Adjuvant Therapy: Treatment to Keep Cancer from Returning (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish

Angiogenesis Inhibitors (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Cancer Alternative Therapies: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Cancer Chemotherapy: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Cancer Immunotherapy: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Cancer Surgery: Physically Removing Cancer (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish

Carcinoma of Unknown Primary Treatment (National Cancer Institute)

Drugs Approved for Solid Tumors Anywhere in the Body (National Cancer Institute)

Extragonadal Germ Cell Tumors Treatment (National Cancer Institute)

Finding Cancer Care (National Cancer Institute)

Hyperthermia to Treat Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Immunotherapy to Treat Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Lasers to Treat Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Radiation Therapy: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

When Cancer Spreads: Improving Treatments for Metastasis (National Institutes of Health) Also in Spanish

Cancer--Living with Cancer: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Adjusting to Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Cancer Causes: Popular Myths about the Causes of Cancer (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish

Cancer Clusters (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Chemicals in Meat Cooked at High Temperatures and Cancer Risk (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Common Cancer Myths and Misconceptions (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Emotions and Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Hair Dyes, Other Hair Products, and Cancer Risk (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Informal Caregivers in Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Obesity and Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Physical Activity and Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Recurrent Cancer: When Cancer Comes Back (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Stay Away from Tobacco (American Cancer Society) Also in Spanish

Stress and Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Vaccinations and Flu Shots for People with Cancer (American Cancer Society) Also in Spanish

Vitamin D and Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Advance Directives (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Metastatic Cancer: When Cancer Spreads (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

BAP1 tumor predisposition syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

Bloom syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

Cowden syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

DICER1 syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

Genetic Testing for Inherited Cancer Risk (National Cancer Institute)

Genetics of Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

Rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

Understanding Genetic Testing for Cancer Risk (American Cancer Society) Also in Spanish

Werner syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

Understanding Cancer Prognosis (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

About Cancer Clinical Research (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Cancer Clinical Trials at the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Cancer Data and Statistics (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Cancer Statistics (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Obesity and Cancer (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Also in Spanish

Statistics and Graphs: Cancer Survivorship (National Cancer Institute)

Clinical Trials Information for Patients and Caregivers (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

ClinicalTrials.gov: Carcinoma (National Institutes of Health)

ClinicalTrials.gov: Neoplasms (National Institutes of Health)

NCI's Clinical Trials Programs and Initiatives (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Journal Articles References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine)

Article: Long-Term Outcomes, Moderators, and Predictors in Online Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for...

Article: Effectiveness of a Technology-Based Psychosocial Empowerment Program for Children With Cancer...

Article: Mixed methods process theory evaluation to explore the implementation issues of...

National Cancer Institute News (National Cancer Institute)

NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Cancer Support Groups (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Choosing a Cancer Doctor (American Cancer Society) Also in Spanish

National Cancer Institute Also in Spanish

NCI-Designated Cancer Centers (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Cancer in Children: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer (National Cancer Institute) Also in Spanish

Cancer and Men (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Also in Spanish

Cancer and Women (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Also in Spanish

Cancer (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Cancer and lymph nodes (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Cancer treatment - early menopause (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Cancer treatment - preventing infection (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Cancer treatments (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

How to research cancer (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

How to tell your child that you have cancer (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Hyperthermia for treating cancer (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Laser therapy for cancer (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Photodynamic therapy for cancer (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Targeted therapies for cancer (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Understanding your cancer prognosis (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Your cancer care team (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Your cancer diagnosis - Do you need a second opinion? (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish