Dengue is a viral infection . It can be caused by four related viruses. You can get it if an infected mosquito bites you. It is common in warm, wet areas of the world. Although rare, it can be found in some parts of the United States. Outbreaks are more common during rainy seasons.

Dengue spreads to people through the bite of an infected mosquito. It does not spread directly from person to person. However, the infection can be passed to the baby during pregnancy. In rare cases, it can spread through a blood transfusion , organ transplant , or needle stick injury (an accidental injury from a used needle)..

What are the symptoms of dengue and severe dengue?

About one in four people infected with dengue will get sick. For those who do get sick, the infection can be mild or severe. The symptoms of dengue include:

Aches and pains (eye pain, usually behind the eyes, and pain in the muscles, joints, or bones)

The symptoms usually last two to seven days.

Severe dengue is a serious form of the illness. About 1 in 20 people who get sick with dengue will develop severe dengue. It can cause shock , internal bleeding, and even death. People are more likely to develop severe dengue if they have had dengue before, are pregnant, or are infants.

Watch for signs and symptoms of severe dengue. Warning signs usually begin about 24 - 48 hours after your fever has gone away. If you or your family member have these signs, get immediate medical care:

Severe abdominal (belly) pain and tenderness

Vomiting at least 3 times in 24 hours

Vomiting blood, or blood in the stool (poop)

Feeling tired, restless, or irritable

There is a blood test which can show if you have been infected with dengue.

What are the treatments for dengue?

There is no specific medicine to treat dengue. Most people will get better after about a week. But if you think you might have dengue:

See a health care provider and mention any recent travel.

Take acetaminophen to control fever and relieve pain. But do not take aspirin or ibuprofen.

Drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration .

Severe dengue often requires care at a hospital.

In the United States, a dengue vaccine is approved for children who are ages 9 - 16. They must also have previously had dengue and live in areas where dengue is common.

You can also help prevent dengue by avoiding mosquito bites:

Wear insect repellent with DEET or another U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent. Make sure to follow the instructions for using the repellant.

Wear clothes that cover your arms, legs and feet.

Close unscreened doors and windows.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Dengue (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Also in Spanish

Dengue and Severe Dengue (World Health Organization) Also in Spanish

Dengue Fever (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases)

Symptoms of Dengue and Testing (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Also in Spanish

Dengue Fever Test (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

About a Dengue Vaccine (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Dengue: Prevention (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Also in Spanish

Find the Repellent that is Right for You (Environmental Protection Agency) Also in Spanish

Protect against Mosquito Bites when Traveling (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) - PDF Also in Spanish

Areas with Risk of Dengue (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Also in Spanish

Data and Statistics on Dengue in the United States (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

ClinicalTrials.gov: Dengue (National Institutes of Health)

Journal Articles References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine)

Article: Analyzing the comparative effectiveness of educational methods to foster children's dengue...

Article: Humoral and cellular responses to a tetravalent dengue vaccine (TAK-003) in...

Article: Daily Mosnodenvir as Dengue Prophylaxis in a Controlled Human Infection Model.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Also in Spanish

National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

Dengue Fever (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish

Manage Dengue in Infants (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Also in Spanish

Dengue fever (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish