Heart disease is a general term that includes many types of heart problems. It's a type of cardiovascular disease, which means heart and blood vessel disease.

Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States, but there are ways to prevent and manage many types of heart disease.

What are the types of heart disease?

There are many different types of heart disease. Some you may be born with, called congenital heart disease . Other types develop during your lifetime.

Coronary artery disease (also called coronary heart disease) is the most common type of heart disease. It happens slowly over time when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply your heart muscle with blood. The plaque narrows or blocks blood flow to the heart muscle and can lead to other heart problems:

Angina - chest pain from lack of blood flow

Heart attacks - when part of the heart muscle dies from loss of blood flow

Heart failure - when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs

Arrhythmia - a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat

Other types of heart diseases may affect your heart valves or heart muscle ( cardiomyopathy ).

The causes of heart disease depend on the type of disease. Some possible causes include lifestyle, genetics, infections, medicines, and other diseases.

Who is more likely to develop heart diseases?

There are many different factors that can make you more likely to develop heart disease. Some of these factors you can change, but others you cannot.

Age. Your risk of heart disease goes up as you get older.

Sex. Some factors may affect heart disease risk differently in women than in men.

Family history and genetics. A family history of early heart disease raises your risk. And research has shown that some genes are linked to a higher risk of certain heart diseases.

Race/ethnicity. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in most racial and ethnic groups in the United States. However, certain groups have higher risks than others. This includes Black people, White people, and American Indian/Alaska Native people.

Lifestyle habits. Over time, unhealthy lifestyle habits can raise your risk of heart disease. These can include: Eating a diet high in saturated fats , refined carbohydrates, and salt . Not getting enough physical activity . Drinking too much alcohol . Smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke . Too much stress .

Eating a diet high in saturated fats , refined carbohydrates, and salt .

Not getting enough physical activity .

Smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke .

Having other medical conditions can raise your risk of heart diseases. These conditions include: High blood pressure . High cholesterol levels . Diabetes . Obesity . Autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Chronic kidney disease . Metabolic syndrome .

Autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.

What are the symptoms of heart disease?

Your symptoms will depend on the type of heart disease you have. You may not have symptoms at first. In some cases, you may not know you have heart disease until you have a complication such as a heart attack.

How are heart diseases diagnosed?

To find out if you have heart disease, your health care provider will:

Ask about your medical history , including your symptoms

Ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had heart disease

Likely run heart tests and blood tests

In some cases, your provider may refer you to a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) for tests, diagnosis, and care.

What are the treatments for heart disease?

Treatment plans for heart disease depend on the type of heart disease you have, how serious your symptoms are, and what other health conditions you have. Possible treatments may include:

Heart-healthy lifestyle changes

Can heart diseases be prevented?

You may be able to lower your risk of certain heart diseases by making heart-healthy lifestyle changes and managing any other medical conditions you have.

NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Heart Disease (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish

What Are Heart Disease and Stroke? (American Heart Association) Also in Spanish

Your Guide to Living Well with Heart Disease (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute)

Cholesterol Levels (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Heart Disease Risk Assessment (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Heart Health Tests: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Lipoprotein (a) Blood Test (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Picturing the Heart (National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering)

Heart Disease Risk Factors (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

How to Prevent Heart Disease: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Risks for Heart Disease and Stroke (Department of Health and Human Services)

Take Action for Your Heart: Get Started! (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute) - PDF

Blood Thinners: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Chelation for Coronary Heart Disease: What You Need To Know (National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health)

Five Things to Know about Omega-3s for Heart Disease (National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health)

Heart Surgery: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Herbal Supplements and Heart Medicines May Not Mix (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish

Pacemakers and Implantable Defibrillators: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Types of Heart Medications (American Heart Association)

Cardiac Rehabilitation: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Coping with Feelings (American Heart Association)

Healthy Recipes (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Medication Adherence: Taking Your Meds as Directed (American Heart Association)

Medication Management (American Heart Association)

What Is Heart-Healthy Living? (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute) Also in Spanish

Air Pollution, Climate, and Heart Disease (American Heart Association)

All about Heart Rate (American Heart Association)

Chronic Kidney Disease, Diabetes, and Heart Disease (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Diabetes, Heart Disease, and Stroke (National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases) Also in Spanish

Flu and People with Heart Disease or History of Stroke (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Illegal Drugs and Heart Disease (American Heart Association)

Inflammation and Heart Disease (American Heart Association)

Medication Interactions: Food, Supplements, and Other Drugs (American Heart Association)

Mental Health and Heart Health (American Heart Association)

People at Higher Risk of Flu Complications (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Take Diabetes to Heart (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute) - PDF

Black People, Heart Disease and Stroke (American Heart Association)

Cardiac Amyloidosis (American Heart Association)

Cardiac Sarcoidosis (Johns Hopkins Medicine)

Enlarged Heart (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish

Left Ventricular Hypertrophy (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish

Myocardial Bridge (Texas Heart Institute) Also in Spanish

Myocardial Ischemia (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish

Top 10 Myths about Cardiovascular Disease (American Heart Association)

Familial HDL deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

Tangier disease: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

Williams syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine)

3 Delicious Heart Healthy Recipes (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute)

Blood flow (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Cardiovascular system (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Heart Palpitations Quiz (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

About the Atlas of Heart Disease and Stroke (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

FastStats: Heart Disease (National Center for Health Statistics)

Heart and Stroke Statistics (American Heart Association)

Heart Disease Facts (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Racial and Ethnic Dispartities in Heart Disease (National Center for Health Statistics) - PDF

What the Latest Heart Disease and Stroke Numbers Mean for Your Health (American Heart Association)

ClinicalTrials.gov: Cardiovascular Diseases (National Institutes of Health)

ClinicalTrials.gov: Heart Diseases (National Institutes of Health)

Journal Articles References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine)

Article: Management of brain-heart multimorbidity: a clinical practice guideline.

Article: Ex Vivo Effect of Apixaban on Hemostatic Biomarkers in Children With...

Article: Sacubitril/Valsartan and Prevention of Cardiac Dysfunction During Adjuvant Breast Cancer Therapy:...

Heart Diseases -- see more articles

Heart Anatomy (Texas Heart Institute) Also in Spanish

Heart Information Center (Texas Heart Institute) Also in Spanish

How the Heart Works (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute) Also in Spanish

Doctor Finder (Database of Interventional Radiologists) (Society of Interventional Radiology)

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Heart Disease (For Kids) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish

Ventricular Assist Device (For Parents) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish

About Men and Heart Disease (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Heart Disease in Women: MedlinePlus Health Topic (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish

Heart Health (National Institute on Aging)

Aspirin and heart disease (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Being active when you have heart disease (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Electrocardiogram (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Exercise stress test (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Heart disease - risk factors (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Heart disease and depression (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Know the Difference: Cardiovascular Disease, Heart Disease, and Coronary Heart Disease (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute) - PDF

Understanding cardiovascular disease (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

Warning signs and symptoms of heart disease (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish