Malaria is a serious infection spread by mosquitoes found in some parts of the world. You can die from it if it's not diagnosed and treated quickly.

Check if you're at risk of malaria

Malaria is caused by being bitten by an infected mosquito. It can take just 1 bite to get it.

The infection is very common in certain parts of the world.

It's found in tropical regions, including:

Malaria is not found in the UK.

You cannot usually catch malaria from another person. But rarely, it can be passed on by:

a mother passing it to her unborn baby during pregnancy

a needlestick injury, where a used needle accidentally punctures someone's skin

It's important to check the malaria risk for the country you're travelling to before you go.

You're still at risk of getting malaria if you now live in the UK but were born or used to live in a high-risk country. You will not be immune to malaria anymore.

Find out more about the risk of malaria in specific countries on the Travel Health Pro website

If you're travelling to an area where malaria is found, get advice from a GP, nurse, pharmacist or travel clinic before you go.

It's best to do this at least 4 to 6 weeks before you travel, but you can still get advice at the last minute if you need to.

You may be prescribed antimalarial tablets to reduce the risk of getting malaria and told how you can prevent mosquito bites.

take any antimalarial medicine you're prescribed – you usually need to start taking it a few days or weeks before you go, until a few weeks after you get back

take any antimalarial medicine you're prescribed – you usually need to start taking it a few days or weeks before you go, until a few weeks after you get back

use insect repellent on your skin – make sure it's 50% DEET-based

use insect repellent on your skin – make sure it's 50% DEET-based

sleep under mosquito nets treated with insecticide

sleep under mosquito nets treated with insecticide

wear long-sleeved clothing and trousers to cover your arms and legs in the evening, when mosquitos are most active

wear long-sleeved clothing and trousers to cover your arms and legs in the evening, when mosquitos are most active

It's especially important to get advice before you travel if you're at higher risk of getting seriously ill from malaria.

if you have a weak immune system

You may be advised to avoid travelling to areas where there's a high risk of malaria or you may be prescribed antimalarial medicine before travelling to a low-risk area.

Malaria can be hard to spot, but symptoms include:

a high temperature, or feeling hot, cold or shivery

feeling very tired and sleepy (especially in children)

feeling and being sick, tummy pain and diarrhoea

yellow whites of the eyes or skin ( jaundice ), although this may be less noticeable on brown or black skin

a sore throat, cough and difficulty breathing

These symptoms usually appear between 7 and 18 days after you've been bitten by an infected mosquito.

But sometimes you may not have symptoms for months after travel, and rarely years.

Urgent advice: Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:

you have malaria symptoms and you've travelled to a country where malaria is found during the last 12 months

If you have symptoms, you should also tell anyone you travelled with to get help straight away.

You can call 111 or get help from 111 online .

Get medical advice quickly if you have malaria symptoms while you're travelling. Do not wait to get home before seeking advice.

Malaria is an emergency and needs to be treated quickly.

It's treated with antimalarial medicines.

Some people may need to stay in hospital to have specialist care and treatment.

Malaria can sometimes come back and will need to be treated again if this happens.

Page last reviewed: 29 July 2025 Next review due: 29 July 2028